Xref: pa.dec.com comp.sources.unix:1728 comp.sources.d:7821 news.misc:7563
Path: pa.dec.com!decwrl!uunet!papaya.bbn.com!rsalz
From: rsalz@bbn.com (Rich Salz)
Newsgroups: comp.sources.unix,comp.sources.d,news.misc
Subject: v24INF3:  New moderator
Message-ID: <3895@litchi.bbn.com>
Date: 14 Nov 91 18:28:31 GMT
Followup-To: comp.sources.d
Organization: BBN Systems and Technologies, Cambridge MA
Lines: 38
Approved: rsalz@uunet.UU.NET

Submitted-by: Rich $alz <rsalz@bbn.com>
Posting-number: Volume 24, Info 3
Archive-name: /dev/null

I am stepping down as the moderator of comp.sources.unix, and turning
the job over to Paul Vixie with Nick Lai and Mike Stump.  The new
email address is
	unix-sources-moderator@pa.dec.com
I will forward any mail that I get.  It will take them awhile to get
organized, so please be patient for just a bit longer.

The rest of this article is more personal; feel free to skip it.


I apologize for the poor service I have provided, and look forward to the
contributions of the new moderators.

I have made many valuable contributions to Usenet source distributions
(posting formats, archive maintenance, etc), and would like to continue to
do so.  Unfortunately, I do not see a time when I will be able to make the
kind of commitment that is needed, and it is not fair to continue to hold
the net hostage to one person's ego.  (That is why I worked to get
comp.sources.misc created at the great renaming, and got the group its
first moderator.)

If I am most satisfied with anything, it is how I have always kept the
this newsgroup on track with its charter.  I disclaimed all copyrights,
actively sought out useful packages to post, did not editorialize (except
favorably) and -- most of all -- tried to direct the credit to the people
who truly deserve it:  those who write programs and make the sources
freely redistributable.

I want to thank everyone for the kind words I have received over the
years; it is very nice to know that the volunteer work has been
appreciated.  Please join me in giving a warm welcome to "Paul and the
boys."  I am sure they will bring this newsgroup to new heights of
usefulness.
	/rich $alz
